Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
For 20 years, Roger Zalazni has been writing science fiction and fantasy.
He tells us why and how he became a science fiction writer.
Well, it's a funny thing.
I was originally a reader of science fiction from about the age of 11 through high school.
During that period, I did write a lot of science fiction stories, which I tried to sell, but
I was like my early teens.
I didn't really meet any success at that point.
I decided actually before that that I wanted to be a writer.
It wasn't necessarily science fiction that I had in mind, though, but it was science fiction
stories that I was writing during the period I was reading them.
When I went to college, I stopped reading science fiction, just concentrated on the material
I had there, and I wrote poetry actually, exclusively.
I decided that I was going to start writing again as soon as I got out of college and
had some time.
At that point, I wasn't absolutely certain what it was that I would try writing, but
when the opportunity finally presented itself in early 1962, I decided it might be easier
for me to break into science fiction since I had read so much of it in the past, knew
the area.
So I decided I'd try there first, and I went out and re-familiarized myself with science
fiction.
Then I began writing and submitting the stories, and after about six or seven weeks, I sold
my first one.
I sold 16 others that year, so I stayed with it.
Zalazny has always been recognized as a stylist, a writer to whom craftsmanship is important.
His characters have depth, and his prose is coherent and flexible.
Right, and that's an important point to make.
Science fiction has traditionally been a field in which style and character were secondary
to plot and idea.
Zalazny's college background in his major field of study, English, may have had some
influence on his writing.
As an undergraduate, I was a psychology major, and I decided I did not really want to work
as a psychologist, and it occurred to me somewhere along the line that if I'm simply
going to be teaching and writing with the aim in mind of eventually writing full time,
I might as well teach something that would be a little more fun than psychology.
So I switched to English and took my graduate work in English and comparative literature.
As a result of his background, Zalazny says, his stories had some characteristics not common
to traditional science fiction.
I suppose having grown up on the earlier sort of science fiction, the space opera sort of
thing of the 30s and 40s too, and the harder science stories of the 40s and some of the
sociological science fiction of the 50s, and having a background in literature, I, there's
a natural tendency, whether it's conscious or not, to want to do something different
than the things that had gone before.
As a consequence, my stories, well the first ones were basically gimmick stories because
it was the easiest way to break in.
It was about all that I was capable of doing at the time, but when I began writing at greater
length and when I was a bit sure of myself, I would think of the characters first so the
stories tended to have more, I suppose, in the way of psychological motivation rather
than just external characterization.
My writing itself, possibly because of the years I spent writing poetry and reading
general literature, tended to be a bit different from some of the earlier things which were
kind of journalistic in character.
More next time about Roger Zalazny.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Science fiction authors sometimes write fantasy, and fantasy authors sometimes write science
fiction. Roger Zalazny writes both.
He talks about the differences between the two forms.
I do make the distinction myself. In a science fiction story, everything I feel should be
explainable in terms of natural laws or extensions of natural laws as we understand them now.
Whereas in a fantasy story, it's part of the rules of the game, so I feel there are
no compunctions against invoking the supernatural or bringing in magic and things of that sort.
And so basically a science fiction story, things are ultimately explainable in a fantasy
story. They're explainable really in terms of something that isn't explainable. So you've
got more, you've got the less rational background if you push things far enough in a fantasy
story.
So Zalazny says he writes some of his books so that they can be read either way.
I also believe in mixing the two. Lord of Light, for instance, was a book where I intentionally
wrote it to be taken two ways. A fantasy fan could read it as a piece of fantasy, whereas
a science fiction fan also had options available to him. Any single item which occurs in there,
which is of an unusual nature, is that there's ultimately an explanation available for it
if the person cares to use it. If he doesn't, that's fine too.
Zalazny makes an interesting point about science fiction. He says that sometimes a science
fiction story will become a fantasy story after a certain amount of time.
And he uses one of his own stories, A Rose for Ecclesiastes, as an example.
It's kind of funny too because I think the first story for which I became known was a
piece called A Rose for Ecclesiastes. And one of my reasons in writing this is because
I was very fond of the earlier space operas and things like this, where they, John Carter
of Mars, or, and I had always wanted to do something set on the Mars, which existed in
these earlier stories. And I knew at the time I wrote it that it was scientifically impossible
at that point. We already knew enough about Mars to know that the temperature was not
the same as I had it in the story, that the atmosphere was not the same and so forth. But
it was close enough to the point where this knowledge was just becoming current that I
could still get away with doing a thing like that. So I intentionally wrote that and wrote
it in the fashion I did. I was a kind of exercise in nostalgia on my part. I always wanted to
do a story set on that kind of Mars and I knew that if I waited another year or so I
would have my story in the doors of his face, the lamps of his mouth. At that point we already
were aware that the surface temperature was about 900 degrees, but still there were these,
there was this whole traditional body of science fiction literature which had a vast watery
world, a misty and so forth, that I really had wanted to use at least once in my life.
So I did those two stories as a kind of tribute to the earlier things. But then again I wrote
them the way I was writing them rather than in the older style. So reading them now they
have to be regarded as fantasy rather than science fiction because science has already
demonstrated that those circumstances don't prevail.
More on Roger's alasney tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Many science fiction and fantasy authors these days write
novels in series in three, four and sometimes five book sets. Jack Schocker's Well World
series or Elizabeth Lynn's trilogy The Chronicles of Tornor are two good examples. It's a commercially
attractive idea for one thing. If readers like the first book then there's a ready-made
market for the following ones. And of course it also allows an author the scope to pursue
a theme in greater depth and length than a single book would allow. And the extra depth
can give an epic quality to the series. One of the best of the series is a set of five
books by Roger's alasney, a science fantasy adventure called simply The Amber Series.
The first volume is entitled Nine Princes and Amber and it was published in 1971. The
other four are the Guns of Avalon, Sign of the Unicorn, The Hand of Oberon, and the Courts
of Chaos. So alasney calls the book Something Beside Science Fantasy. Whenever I try anything
of this sort I try to give an extra twist is what it is. Basically I look at it myself
as a kind of heroic fantasy with a few variations that don't usually occur in that sort of
literature. One of the variations alasney develops in the books is what's called the
pattern. It is a kind of archetypal design which exists in the real world, amber, of
which our own earth and a great variety of shadings and variations thereof exist. Amber
is the real world earth and the others are referred to as shadow. Our shadow in the story
is the background, the basis of reality in amber is this design called the pattern which
was inscribed by an ancestor of the clan about whom the story is told. Only a person
of the blood of the royal family of amber is able to walk this pattern and not be destroyed
by it. And in the course of walking the pattern at some point in his early life the amberite
acquires the ability to walk through the various shadow worlds which surround amber
so that he can travel through an infinity of possibilities to virtually any world he
desires. The basic plot of the series consists of a struggle for the throne of amber and
in the process our earth is threatened with destruction since we are only a shadow of
the real world of amber. In the struggle the main character Corwin keeps traveling between
our earth and amber. Technology doesn't work in amber so the people there fight with swords
and magic. For this reason the books are called science fantasy or as Zalazny said heroic
fantasy. They've been very popular too. Zalazny says the readers have responded enthusiastically.
I have gotten more fan letters on the amber books than anything else I've ever written.
There was a period of a couple of years there I was getting several letters a week on the
amber books. The narrative was concluded with an exciting climax in the fifth book the
courts of chaos. Because of the wide reader response though and because there were some
unanswered questions in that last book a sixth novel on amber is a possibility. There is
possibly a sixth one. I have made no commitments I do not have a plot but I've been talking
about it and thinking about it publisher. It is possible when I get a few things out
of the way that I'm writing now that I might go on and do a sixth one. But so far as the
five books that now exist are concerned that story is told. That was the story I had in
mind. Anything which would continue the series would probably take off in a new direction.
It could possibly be from another character's point of view. More about Roger Zalazny next
time. This has been the science fiction radio show production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show. A commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. One of the more interesting time travel books in
recent years is Roadmarks by Roger Zalazny. Though time travel is one of the traditional
science fiction themes, Zalazny doesn't often write that type of story. I have always attempted
to avoid time travel stories because I don't like the paradoxes involved. In fact the only
thing I can think of that I had done in the past was a short story called Divine Madness
where I said that I really wouldn't write a time travel story unless I came up with
a new gimmick. Well for Roadmarks I thought I had something just in the image of time
considered as a super highway basically and without the paradoxes in Everett Wheeler
who parallel worlds sort of situation. It was really the image of the road that fascinated
me and let my writing that particular book. Time is conceived as a super highway in Roadmarks
with the exits leading to different eras throughout time. Zalazny has an interesting story to tell
regarding the origin of the idea behind Roadmarks. I got the idea for that book here in New Mexico
really one Sunday I was just off for a drive and I-25 which is a nice highway type road.
Took a turn off and drove for a few minutes and the road rapidly degenerated until with
a matter of minutes I was on a dirt road and I passed through a place that I couldn't
find on the map. It was a little village where there was a horse pulling a wagon and no overhead
electrical lines in sight. It was almost as if I had driven back through time into the
19th century. There were log buildings and somewhere around there something started to
click and as I drove back again and the road improved and improved until finally I was on
the super highway I started working out the just the mechanisms for the idea of driving
through time which I used in Roadmarks. Actually by the time I got home I had a number of the
situations worked out and I sat down and began writing it.
The protagonist is a man named Red Dorokin. He travels up and down this highway of time
in a battered old pickup. And when he's not trying to avoid and outwit some assassins
who are after him he's running guns to the Greeks back in the past at Marathon. And there's
something else in the book that's a recurring motif or symbol. Huge dragons that float above
the road occasionally. Their function is not clear but they seem to have some responsibility
for the road. They were simply to represent the dark forces which I tend to bring in any
fantasy novel. In a story like this there has to be a point where you have to ultimately
reach something that's basically unexplainable. Namely where did the road come from and how
did it come to function the way that it did. And in making a decision on that I could go
either way. I could find some science fiction trappings and explain it or I could leave it
intentionally. Something shadowy and with a more fantasy background. If I did that I
decided I needed some symbol to invoke as an ultimate creator of the road. So hence the
dragons and then they're tie in with red. Roadmarks published in 1981 is a different
sort of time travel story tending toward the fantasy rather than the science fiction end
of the spectrum. And since Rogers Alasney is responsible for it it's highly enjoyable
and we'll have more on Rogers Alasney on our next show. This has been the science fiction
radio show production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction
with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are
your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Writer Rogers Alasney has won numerous awards in the field of science fiction and fantasy
and he's been writing it for some 20 years.
So Alasney has a scholarly background which often shows up in his books. The way he uses
mythology for instance in novels like Lord of Light or This Immortal or Psychology and
the Dream Masters.
He has a master's degree in literature and his knowledge of history is extensive. He's
read deeply in the mythologies and early literature of mankind and he also reads a great deal
of modern literature, both science fiction and otherwise.
He has some interesting ideas on science fiction and fantasy and it's placed in the modern
world. Science fiction is a special genre to him for a few basic reasons.
It is for one reason, one of the few special places where you still deal with characters
other than those which occur in the modern realistic or naturalistic novel. Going back
to the critic, Northrop Fry, who spoke of characters in various modes. Science fiction
is one of the few places outside of modern poetry where a writer can deal with characters
in what he called the Chaimimetic or the Mythic modes, that is characters who are greater
than their fellow man or characters who are godlike sometimes. In that science fiction
does deal with mutants and aliens and sentient computers and cyborgs and robots. What have
it just all categories of beings which are different than the characters you meet with
in a naturalistic or realistic novel. So in that sense, and I think this is one of the
great virtues of science fiction, it gives the writer more scope for exploration in terms
of character.
Besides the freedom or scope that science fiction provides for a writer, it also has
one other quality that Zalazny feels differentiates it from general or mainstream literature.
I think that science fiction is still basically for all of the experimentation that went on
in the 60s, a bastion of storytelling. The idea is not necessarily the hero anymore as
it was in these Kingsley Amos referred to as being such back in the 40s and perhaps
the 50s, but we have real characters now and ideas are handled in a more sophisticated
fashion. The writing has also improved from a stylistic standpoint, but basically I think
if you looked at the area, well even statistically, there are more examples of straightforward
storytelling in science fiction than you might find in general fiction at large. So that is
another reason I am very fond of science fiction because I am basically a storyteller
no matter what I do with mythology or writing devices.
Does Zalazny think science fiction will ever merge with general literature and gain a wider
acceptance?
I don't think it will necessarily be merged with the mainstream and I also do not think
that this is necessarily a bad thing at all. It was Santayana who said that about something
else entirely, which I think is apropos, to attempt to give such things a wide currency
is to be willing to denature them in order to post that they have been propagated. I
always have its devotees and that they will grow in number just as the population itself
increases, but I don't know that the percentage is ever going to increase greatly.
The chances are pretty good that science fiction has at least a few more readers and fans than
it would have had had Zalazny not taking it up. His works stand as an advertisement for
the quality and value of good science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.